The ontological designing and/of lawSo entrenched is law that people obtain freedom under it only at the unnoticed cost of being already legal in their being and thinking. (Ben-Dor, 2007, p. ix)Imaginary constructions take on, over time, ontological dimensions; descriptions of an object become the object itself.(Mignolo, 1995, p. 237)from the sixteenth century, North America and the Caribbean formed the reference point, the font of experience, law, and practice that defined British settler colonialism thereafter. (Ford, 2010, pp. 5–6)________________________________________Law as the narrative that regulates violence in the name of the state.----Law is made with intention. Custom is spontaneous emergence.Law specially sanctioned agent to enforce it. Custom is enforced by spontaneous social actionLaw relies upon explicit and clear definition. Customs are not definite or clear, not codified in booksLaws can be changed in a responsive and dynamic way. Customs change more slowly.Customs fade and disappear without formal abolition or recognition. Laws disappear only when abolished by an authority.Law is more idealistic, directed towards aims the exceed practice. Law reforms custom.Law deals with what is vital to the life of a society. Custom is more ordinary and familiar.Design is rarely if ever thought of as having much to do with law. Save for the design of courthouses or chambers of legislative processThe disconnect that exists between questions and conceptions of design and questions and conceptions of law is not the product a natural division. Rather, it is the product of an historical process of distinctionLaw: formal sets of rules that govern or direct behaviour.Custom: widely accepted expectations that are particular to place, time, and social relations.Law is metaphysical, custom is physical.Law is civilised, custom is primitive.Law is flexibleIt is important to bear in mind that the law/custom distinction is internal to the tradition of law and not a universal of human understanding. Law brings custom into being as its condition ofThe question of the ontological designing of law is the question of the relation between what law________________________________________Vitoria: limit of papal power, right of missioning andDutch jurist Hugo Grotius (1583-1645)English political philosopher John Locke (1632-1704)________________________________________Francisco de Vitoria and the problem of cultural differenceThe question to engage in this section concerns the meshwork of interest and frameworks of interpretation that prefigured and directed the British invasion of Cadigal country in 1788 and the subsequent expansion and consolidation of European rule across the continent of Australia over the course of the nineteenth-century. The analysis to follow looks to build upon Ann Stoler’s claim that virtually all colonies are artifacts of design. In Stoler’s terms, “Design is key for it announces how much the colony as a political concept commands the pre-emptive, calculates malintent, assesses future transgressions and potential breaches of security” (Stoler, 2011). Design is of course no guarantor of success for any particular colony but the significance for Stoler lies in the fact that design is nevertheless essential to how the colony is “imagined, implemented, and lived in its conditional, future tense.” Stoler’s insight speaks specifically to the concept of the ‘colony’ but it is nevertheless a valuable point of reflection and departure for thinking about the role of design within colonial practice.The questions I wish to work through here are closely related but slightly different. While Stoler describes design as something that “works in the subjunctive mood and gravitates to the possible” my interest here lies in the process by which coloniality takes form as an force that is itself both designed and designing. The value of this shift in emphasis is that it brings to light the significance of thinking the subjective mood itself as a product of design. Design does indeed work in the subjunctive mood but the subjunctive mood is likewise worked on by design just as the subjunctive mood itself materialises its agency in what it itself designs and the direction force that such designs embody. The point to draw out here – one that can be found by reading across Spinoza, Nietzsche, and Heidegger, theorists of affect and materiality such as Lauren Berlant and Angela Mitropoulos, and Indigenous philosophers such as Norman Sheehan – is that no mood, no matter their ephemerality – the subjunctive included – is ever neutral, eternal, singular, or immaterial.On this point the work of Heidegger is of particular value insofar as he saw moods as playing an essential role in formation of everyday basic meaningfulness. For Heidegger, moods are not only a part of the world, they reveal and dispose our being-in-the-world as such. Berlant’s studies reveal quite clearly how the directional agency of even flat or low-key moods is modulated to systemic political effect through the agency cultural artifacts. Mitropoulos traces this insight into contemporary techniques of risk distribution, finding that imaginative practices play a vital role in helping investment managers “derive an estimate of value from speculations on uncertainty through correlations of intensities of divergent qualities”(Mitropoulos, 2015, p. 167). Moods thus reveal something of the manner in which a locus of enunciation takes form at the same time that it takes hold. Just as Mignolo builds his theory of the locus of enunciation on the basis of a materialist theory of semiotics, so too does Berlant help us understand mood as a product and producer of material formations.Relatedly, while there are fine technical or analytical reasons for delineating the subjective as a distinctive mood amongst others, such a move comes with a number of consequences that are worth bearing in mind. From a relational perspective, the category of the subjective is the construction of a mind that divides and organises the meaning of affectual states in particular ways. In this sense the category of the subjective represents a systematisation of intensity as opposed to a simple or technical definition of the particular use of verbs. This becomes clear once it is recognised that any activity that takes place in the mode of the “what if …” always already occurs in presence of a feeling that enables and guides action. As attested by layout and culture of design studios, offices, and the homes of professional designers, the mood of the subjunctive is something that has to be gathered, cultivated, and honed. Designers know, implicitly or otherwise, that their practice of developing “what if …” illocutions is depended upon the regulation of a certain terrain of feeling (see also Tonkinwise on the function of style in design practice). The notion of the subjunctive is thus designed to index a quality that is tacitly known and valued but which would otherwise lie beyond the scope of formal regulation. To define the subjective, therefore, is to enact a particular way of partitioning, ordering, deploying, and directing the general flux of intensities. The meaning of the subjective as a distinctively defined mode discourse or action is, thus, not grounded in any natural or supernatural kind. The notion of the subjunctive is, therefore, as historical, contingent, and ethnocentric as whatever it is that makes up the content of the “what if …”.Delineating the contours of the subjective from amidst the relational flux of intensities is in this sense a form of meta-design, that is, a way of defining and directing the very meaning of design. The point, to be clear, is not to say that design does not operate either in the subjective or in mood as such. Both are the case. Rather, the point is to recognise that design can mean something other than as defined in relation to the meaning of the subjunctive. The notion of subjective is a means of organising the relation between particular bundles of intensities, attachments, images, tendencies, dispositions, intentions, and purposes. While it holds meaning for the way we understand design it also holds that meaning in place. Because the meaning of the subjunctive has taken form against the background and in the context of coloniality it stands to reason that we try to remain conscious of its effects and open to meanings that arise from other loci of enunciation. manner in which  the world as such a locus of enunciation, meaning that however it appears it is itself an historico-political formation. insight into how significant design is to  colonial enterprise ofMy task begins with the observation that the arrival of First Fleet represents a momentColoniality is a tradition of practice that respondsthat is constantly reproducing its own traditions of practiceThe purpose of this section is to trace the implications of the jurisprudence of Spanish colonisation in as a key moment in a movement that connects sixteenth-century colonial practices to the invasion and settlement of British forces in Australia in the late eighteenth-century and the subsequent course of modern/colonial development across the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Part of the argument to be made here is that there is a genealogical connection between colonisation of Americas and the colonisation of Australia that is mediated by the shifting and mutating terms by which European intellectuals gave conceptual force to the coloniality of power.The manner by which I trace a genealogy of intellectual practice is not premised on a distinction that gives preferential force to either ‘ideas’ or ‘matter’. Rather, my way of reading thinkers like Vitoria is connection with their historical context is premised on an understanding of ontological designing that posits the concept of being-in-the-word as the premise for a relational theory directional inscription. In terms of design theory, the rationale for my approach to reading of the work of intellectuals as a source of insight into design is grounded in a processual and relational conception of what design is and does. The summarised in Abby Lopes’ claim that ideas are a material force within the construction and destruction of worlds. The designerly significance of ideas in this sense twofold: 1) they are evidence for examining the terms by which an existing mode of being is organised and directed, and 2) they are the basis upon which prefigural change, becoming, or an ontological shift can be brought into existence.As a point of clarification, my intention here is not to suggest that the movement between the colonisation of the Americas and the colonisation of Australia is smooth, simple, or teleological determined. The story to trace here is not that of an essence of coloniality from a definitive moment of birth to a later or higher stage of maturity. Rather, my way of understanding of the path that connects the Americas to Australia is rooted in an image of people making use of the intellectual and material resources available to them in order to deal with whatever it is that emerges as an object of difficultly and interest. By this account basis of historical movement lies not in some teleological point of reference but in the shifting and relationally indivisible formations of interest, objective, and equipment.matters is the tools of In this sense my understanding of how to trace this connection rests upon the varied examples of Nietzsche, Foucault, Fry, and Wynter.“proselytizing is authorized now, not by divine law, but the law of nations, and may be likened to the secular activities of traveling and trading” (Anghie, 1996, p. 97).Francisco de Vitoria (1483-1546) was a Renaissance Spanish jurist and Roman Catholic theologian who is credited as one of the founding figures the modern system of international relations (Schmitt 2003, Anghie 1996).In 1452, on request of King Afonso V of Portugal who was at time at war in North Africa, Pope Nicholas V issued a papal bull Dum Diversas that legitimised the invasion of lands occupied by Saracens, pagan, or non-believing ‘enemies of Christ’. The bull also allowed for any enemy captured or conquered in the process of war to be reduced to perpetual servitude. This rationale was initially carried over into justifications for the conquer and subjugation of Amerindians to the encomienda system of forced tribute however a concern eventually arose over the question of whether or not the Amerindians could be properly regarded as having rejected Christ in the same manner as the Moors. The solution devised to overcome this issue was the Requerimiento (‘Requirement’ or ‘Summons’). Developed in 1513 by legal scholar Juan Lópes Palacios Rubios, the Requerimiento was a text, written in Spanish, that explained the legitimacy of Spanish rule over in the Americas by appeal to the 1493 papal grant and a history that connected the Biblical story of Genesis to the Spanish monarchs. The document was designed to be read to newly encountered – and no doubt entirely baffled – Amerindian populations who were encouraged to “take the time that may be necessary to understand and deliberate upon” the need toacknowledge the Church as the Ruler and Superior of the whole world, and the high priest called Pope, and in his name the King and Queen Doña Juana our lords, in his place, as superiors and lords and kings of these islands and this Tierra-firmeThe audience would also be required to consent to ongoing instruction by Catholic religious fathers.Having received the declaration the audience were advised that those who assent to the terms of authority would be received with “love and charity”, remain “free without servitude”, and would be left to decide for themselves whether or not to convert to the Holy Catholic Faith. Any refusal or malicious delay, however, would invite invasion, war, subjection, slavery, and the requisition of any goods. The deaths and losses that accrued would, in explicit and certain terms, be the fault of the colonised and not the colonisers.The Requerimiento amounted to ritual in which a non-Spanish speaking audience was called upon, in Spanish, to enact an almost immediate transfer of allegiance to an absent and hitherto unheard of authority based on the reasoning of a legal cosmology that was utterly foreign them. Against this context the proto-bureaucratic function of Requerimiento bears something of an uncanny resemblance to the contemporary practice of presenting impenetrably worded software user agreements that are more often than not clicked through without reading or understanding. The manner in which document performs a distribution liability for the costs of colonisation is also significant to the tradition of colonisation that would take form in the proceeding centuries. Of course the one important difference in case of the Requerimiento is that while the stakes for the Amerindians were extreme the possibility of escaping the impact of this grotesque performativity were effectively impossible. Both the author and the conquistadors were apparently aware of this perversity and yet still felt compelled to follow the ritual through. Bartolomé de Las Casas provides one evocative account of an instance in which the Spaniardslearned that there was gold in a particular town or village . . . [they made] their way there at dead of night, when the inhabitants were all in bed and sound asleep and, once they got within, say, half a league of the town itself, read out the terms of this edict, proclaiming (and only to themselves): “Leaders and citizens of such-and-such a town of this Mainland. Be it known to you that there is one true God, one Pope, and one King of Castile who is the rightful owner of all these lands. You are hereby summoned to pay allegiance, etc. Should you fail to do so, take notice that we shall make just war upon you, and your lives and liberty will be forfeit, etc.” Then, in the early hours of the morning, when the poor people were still innocently abed with their wives and their children, they would irrupt into the town, setting fire to the houses and burning the women and children alive and often the men, too, before the poor wretches realized what was happening. (Beasley-Murray, 2011, pp. 4–5)As John Beasley-Murray puts it, while the Spanish could now be said to acting within the terms of their own law, “The native inhabitants can neither accept nor reject the choice that the Spaniards offer. They are beyond the pale of any possible community” (Beasley-Murray, 2011, pp. 4).________________________________________The case of the Requerimiento provides some a sense for the context and terms by which Vitoria entered into his reflections on the respective rights and responsibilities of the Europeans with respect to the Americas and the Amerindians. For the Europeans, both the Americas as a landmass and the Amerindians as a variety of peoples were entirely new, although it took time for the Europeans to come an understanding of just how new (to them) these land and peoples were.As Mignolo explains, the European geo-cosmology was at this time informed by the image of a circle dived by a ‘T’ that demarcated the three, and only three, zones of Asia, Europe, and Africa. Each segment of the T/O diagram was further encoded by categorising the people of each space according to the Biblically derived theory of the ‘Generations of Noah’ or ‘Table of Nations’, a theory of genealogy which held that the three major societies of the earth were the decedents of three sons of Noah. Thus Asia was associated with the decedents of Shem, Europe with Japheth, and Africa with Ham. The association of Africa with Ham would take on an important significance as the interpretation of Ham as a son who was cursed by Noah would gain traction as a theological justification for the African slave trade. As far as Europeans understood such constructions as the T/O diagram accounted all lands of the world, its people and their origins, which, as an assemblage of system, image, and story, played an essential role in the efforts of the Church to regulate practices of relations between people of others faiths and the reproduction of their own system of power. The ‘discovery’ of the Americas and the Amerindians, a land and people beyond the medieval Christian imaginary, represented a dramatic challenge to this order, one that — as Dussell, Mignolo, and Wynter argue — precipitated a major crisis and proceeding paradigm shift in the internal meaning and relations of European theology, philosophy, cosmology, and jurisprudence. The encounter with the Americas and the Amerindians, therefore, can be(from whom ‘America’ is derived) and map-makers around 1503, and it wasn’t until 1520 that Ferdinand Magellan found a passage through to the Pacific that would enable a complete circumnavigation of the globe. The grip of the medieval imagination was so strong, however, that even in 1578Columbus for instance, from the moment of arrival in Hispaniola to his death, was convinced that the lands he travelled to were simply a previously uncharted part of Asia. This story began to be disputed by the explorer Amerigo Vespucci (from whom ‘America’ is derived) and map-makers around 1503, and it wasn’t until 1520 that Ferdinand Magellan found a passage through to the Pacific that would enable a complete circumnavigation of the globe. As Mignolo explains, the European spatial cosmology at the time was informed by the image of a circle dived by a ‘T’ that demarcated the three, and only three, zones of Asia, Europe, and Africa. Each segment of the T/O diagram was further encoded by a description of the people of each space according to the Biblical story of Noah’s three sons, Asia with Shem, Europe with Japheth The grip of the medieval imagination was so strong, however, that even in 1578Both were in effect beings without precedent It took around ten yearsBetween 1537 and 1539 Vitoria wrote two lectures, ‘De Indis Noviter Inventis’ (On the Lately Discovered Indians) and ‘De Jure Bellis Hispanorum in Barbaros’ (On the Law of War Made by the Spaniards on the Barbarian), that are commonly recognised as the founding texts of internal law (Anghie 1996). By this point the colonisation of the Americas by Castilian forces had been in process for over 40 years. The islands of Hispaniola (present day Haiti and the Dominican Republic), Cuba, and Puerto Rico had been secured and many of the Indigenous Taíno population brought under the encomienda system of forced tribute. Colonisation of the mainland was also underway with settlements already founded in the areas of present day Mexico, Guatemala, Colombia, Venezuela and Argentina. Conquest of the Aztec Empire by Hernán Cortés was completed in 1521 and in 1532 the campaign against the Inca Empire lead by Francisco Pizarro had begun.According to Antony Anghie (1996) the major task of Vitoria’s lectures was to resolveThe meeting of the Amerindians and the Spanish was an event that raised questions concerning the legal resolution of competing sovereign claims. According to Anghie, Vitoria was perceptive enough to see that any resolution of such a question would require answers to a number of prior questions.Vitoria took the problem to be one of creating a system of law that could account for relations between two societies that were both radically different and for whom there was prior history of interaction to draw upon. Early efforts to resolve this issue drew upon the Holy Roman Church’s tradition of dealing with the Saracens as heathens. This framework had two major premises: 1) that human relations were governed by divine law, and 2) that by virtue of his divine mission to spread Christianity the Pope exercised universal juristictionVitoria rejects the universal authority of the Pope in favour of a proto-secular form of international law.He creates a universally binding system of law by appeal to the doctrine of natural law. This resolves the problem of developing a common framework for binding Spanish and Indian.________________________________________Locke (Arniel, 1992)This account draws predominantly on Barbara Arniel’s study of …The justification for colonisation is not just a question of what an external God or natural law has commanded but of a natural right inherent within the individual to appropriate whatever has been mixed with their own labour. The essence of the doctrine is based on the sole legitimacy the European style settled agrarianism …Arniel claims that such doctrine does not “by definition” exclude the Amerindians from any right to property in land.While Locke the avowed empiricist claimed to be basing his theories on empirical accounts of the Amerindians his use of the travelogues in his collection was highly selective and left out details undermined the image he wished to provide of the … ‘natural man’ and the industrious English planter.Locke’s argument begins with the notion of positive common ownership: everything belongs to everybody. The philosophical problem is to derive the legitimacy of personal claim to exclusive ownership in a situation in which this would imply the denial of a collective right.  The founding of property is the right to deny other individuals’ claims.Locke’s criterion for the justification of private property is labour in form of agrarian cultivation. Locke’s thinking here is not entirely original or unique. The same premise formed the basis of Winthrop’s defence of English dispossession of Amerindian land. Locke’s friend and colleague Tyrell had also made use of labour as criterion for arguments concerning property, however the use in this case was as a defence of retaining property previously obtained rather than justifying the act of original appropriation itself. For Locke, on the other hand, this function of justification not including labour but, moreover, labour was the sole and sufficient means of justifying a claim to exclusive use of a good previously held in common. This is in contrast to other theorists such as Pufendorf and Filmer who claimed that individual appropriation was legitimate only consent of all members of the common.Englishmen were seen as having as much of a right to the “spontaneous products of nature” as Amerindians (269). What the land produced of its own accord was available to both Amerindians and Englishmen alike who were prepared to spend their efforts on hunting and gathering their own means of subsistence. The working of the soil, however, was a different matter, one that both Locke and the colonists he was interested to defend saw as a capacity that was unique to themselves and the basis of an entitlement to the land.Just as an animal could be appropriated for use through the labour of the hunter so too could the earth itself be claimed once it had been worked over.cultivation and enclosure [and improvement] determine private property.[As Ellen Meiksins Wood argues, the concept of improvement is important as it represents a very specific kind of justification for appropriation, namely, a vision of the land as both a source for the competitive production of capital as well as an object of investment.]Amerindian: huntingSpanish: miningEnglish: agrarian labourEnclosure “was central to the English notion of property in the new world”. Amerindians were seen as without claim to property for not practicing enclosure.Because of the lack of enclosure Amerindian agriculture was regarded as collective as opposed to individual. Land cultivated in common could not be considered appropriated or of value.Spoilage as a condition of appropriationIf either the Grass of his Inclosure rotted on the Ground, or the Fruit of his planting perished without gathering, and laying up, this part of the Earth, notwithstanding his Inclosure, was still to be looked on as Waste, and might be the Possession of any other. (Locke as quoted in Arniel, 1992, p. 276)Arniel “Indians are limited to that which they may immediately consume: if there is any spoilage, their land may be appropriated, according to the law of nature” (276).Land can only be legitimately appropriated through labour, not land. People can only be governed by consent. Man can only be perfected by reason.reason lies at the heart of both Locke’s transition from the state of nature into civil society, and Jefferson’s basic policy that Indians must become like Europeans. In both cases, natural men will never need to be forced into adopting civil society … because they will by virtue of their own reason, inevitably choose it for themselves.Both Locke and Jefferson argued that Natives chose to fight for their lands and traditions in the face of the superiority of European example because they were far too attached to their habits. It was believed that in time reason would prevail without the need for force.The choice given to the Natives was toretain their own ‘habits’, ‘ways, modes and notions’ and lose their lands or take seemingly inevitable path of reason and adopt private property, the industry of agriculture and government of regular law and lose themselves.In short, a choice between destitution or assimilation into European capitalism.-------English jurist and judge William Blackstone (1723-1780). Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765-69)Plantations or colonies in distant countries, are either such where the lands are claimed by right of occupancy only, by finding them desert and uncultivated, and peopling them from the mother country; or where, when already cultivated, they have been either gained by conquest, or ceded to us by treaties. And both these rights are founded upon the law of nature, or at least upon that of nations. (Blackstone, 1765, p. 104)But there is a difference between these two species of colonies, with respect to the laws by which they are bound. For it is held, that if an uninhabited country by discovered and planed by English subjects, all the English laws are immediately there in force. For as the law is the birthright of every subject, so wherever they go they carry their laws with them. But in conquered or ceded countries, that have already laws of their own, the king may indeed alter and change those laws; but, till he does actually change them, the ancient laws of the country remain, unless such as are against the law of God, as in the case of an infidel country.----Terra NulliusTerra nullius was put into practice for many years before it received formal expression as legal doctrine. From the beginning, Britons interpreted disputes about land between themselves and the Aborigines as evidence that the Aborigines, not the settlers, lacked sufficient understanding of ownership. When Aborigines ate the corn growing on settler farms, for instance, the settlers understood the cause as "their ignorance of our laws relative to the right of property" rather than the reverse. (Banner, 2007, p. 26)Two decisions helped to formalised the doctrine of terra nullius in law. The first came in 1819 in a joint decision by British Attorney General Samuel Shepherd and Solicitor General Robert Gifford regarding a dispute between the Governor of NSW Lachlan Macquarie and NSW Supreme Court judge Barron Field over whether the Crown or the Parliament had the power to impose taxes on the settler residents of NSW. Shepherd and Gifford found that such power resided with Parliament based on the reasoning that conditions for the entitlement of the Crown – possession by conquest or cession – did not apply in a case such as NSW where the land had been taken into possession “as desert and uninhabited”. Three years later another question emerged over the authority of Macquarie’s successor as governor, Thomas Brisbane, to make law in NSW by proclamation. The question fell to James Stephen, a clerk of the Colonial Office, who, under the guidance of Shepherd and Gifford’s previous decision, reasoned in the same fashion: the Crown, represented by the Governor, did not have the right to make laws without the consent of Parliament as the colony “was acquired neither by conquest nor cession, but by the mere occupation of a desert or uninhabited land.”Terra nullius rested on some empirical assertions about Aboriginal life—that the Aborigines were few in number, that they roamed throughout the land without a sense of boundaries, that they claimed no particular territories as their own. In the earliest years of colonization, each of these assumptions came into question and, as they did, so did the doctrine of terra nullius.Governor Phillip was quick to report that the Indigenous peoples were “far more numerous” than the reports of Cook and Banks had lead them to believe. Banks speculation on an uninhabited interior was also proved wrong. In a record of his explorations of the area around the Sydney colony, First Fleet naval officer William Bradley noted “an astonishing number of the Natives all round.”naval captain John Hunter recognised that “they have on fixed residence, and the tribe takes its name from the place of their general residence.”Banner: “tribes were nomadic, but each within its own boundaries.”Europeans learned to understand the Aboriginal people as having a conception of both ownership and dispossession.By the late 1820s, doubt over the legitimacy of the terra nullius doctrine began to appear in local newspapers. In 1827, for example, after some high-profile murders of settlers by Aborigines, the Sydney Gazette raised the question whether the murders were a "perfectly natural and justifiable" response to the British occupation of land belonging to the Aborigines. "Does the mere effecting a settlement by no other right but that of the strongest," the paper asked, "and retaining possession owing to the physical weakness of the owners of the soil, for a period of forty years, does that divest them of their natural right to resist and expel the invaders, whenever they were in a situation to do so? We think not." Lawyers also began constructing defence cases premised on notion that the doctrine of terra nullius was in errorIn the mid-1830s, when Britain began setting up the new colony of South Australia, these attacks on terra nullius appeared to be on the verge of changing colonial land policy. In 1835, the Colonial Office instructed the South Australian Colonization Commission that it could not sell unexplored land to settlers, because the new colony "might embrace in its range numerous Tribes of People, whose Proprietary Title to the Soil, we have not the slightest ground for disputing. Before His Majesty can be advised to transfer to His Subjects, the property in any part of the Land of Australia," the Colonial Office warned, "He must have at least, some reasonable assurance that He is not about to sanction any act of injustice towards the Aboriginal Natives." This letter marked a complete revolution in the colonization of Australia. For the first time, the imperial government recognized the Aborigines as owners of their land.The Colonial Office gave its approval. Setting aside small parcels for Aborigines was nothing new; by 1840 the government of New South Wales had been doing so for some time. Despite the apparent change in land policy in the mid-1830s, the colonization of South Australia looked just the same as in the older Australian colonies. Terra nullius survived.57The Colonial Office ruled against Batman’s 1835 treaty. Private land purchasing from Indigenous people was prohibited within the British colonies.most British Australians seemed to think that the Aborigines possessed an incapacity for improvement rather than a genuine preference for traditional ways.they had no property, declared the barrister Richard Windeyer, because "they have never tilled the soil, or enclosed it, or cleared any portion of it, or planted a single tree or grain or root.""In our opinion, we have exactly the same right to be here, that the older inhabitants have," explained the Southern Australian in 1839. "We found the country in the state in which ages before the black people had found it—its resources undeveloped, unappropriated! In landing here, we exercised a right which we possessed in common with them."Theological/civilizational argument: "In most instances in which a country is taken possession of, and its original inhabitants are removed, enslaved, or exterminated," he noted, in a tone heavy with sarcasm, "the party thus violently seizing upon the rights of others is considered the superior and more civilized nation of the two." But that did not mean the British ought to leave Australia. "It is a gain to the cause of truth and virtue for Christian England to possess those wilds, which lately were occupied by miserable natives," Pridden reasoned; "and, while we own that it is wrong to do evil that good may come, yet may we, likewise, confess with thankfulness the Divine mercy and wisdom which have so often brought good out of the evil committed by our countrymen in these distant lands." To say that terra nullius was wrong was only to raise, not to answer, a difficult ethical question. For virtually all Britons of the period, colonization was an unalloyed good, the humanitarian thing to do, a way of bringing to others the benefits of European civilization.Even the critics of terra nullius tended not to argue in favor of recognizing Aboriginal property rights. They proposed two remedies for the injustice of terra nullius: compensating the Aborigines, and setting aside parcels of unallocated land as permanent Aboriginal reserves.69But the one thing they generally did not advocate was treating the Aborigines as the true owners of their land.65The land titles of every single landowner in Australia were based on a purchase from the Crown. Every landowner had either obtained his land from the government or occupied the final link in a chain of conveyances that had originated with a grant from the government. And the Crown's title to the land rested on the legal fiction that the Crown had instantly become the owner of all the continent in 1788. In short, every landowner in Australia had a vested interest in terra nullius. To overturn the doctrine would be to upset every white person's title to his or her land.Lord Glenelg had little difficulty recognizing that John Batman's ostensible purchase from the Aborigines could not be approved. "It is indeed enough to observe," he pointed out, "that such a concession would subvert the foundation on which all Proprietary rights in New South Wales at present rest."as a correspondent to the South Australian Register calling himself "An Old Settler" noted, even to suggest that the Aborigines owned their land was politically impossible. "If the land is indeed their own," he realized, "the Colonists of South Australia have no title to their land, for a 'voluntary surrender' of it has never been made." If terra nullius were abandoned, he wondered, and if the Aborigines were to try to reclaim their land, "would not the Colonists, as a matter of course, be at once called upon to rise en masse and resist so diabolical an attempt, and would not your newspaper be filled with glowing accounts of the bravery and skill displayed by the Colonists in repelling this atrocious native aggression?"The administrative problems involved in abandoning terra nullius were not insuperable as a logical matter, but each of the conceivable devices for solving those problems was politically infeasible. The government might have discarded the doctrine only prospectively, so that only Crown land would be returned to the Aborigines, and settlers would retain title to land the Crown had already granted to them. Something like this would become law in the 1990s after Mabo. In the nineteenth century, however, such a plan would have deprived the government of what was anticipated to be a major source of revenue, the sale and lease of Crown land.Any colonial land policy, whether terra nullius or its opposite, produced a powerful political force to keep that policy in place. Once the government went down one path or the other, it could not change. (Banner, 2007, p. 46)¬